You see that?
Those subjects are all arbitrary.
I mean, Dewey came up with the Dewey decimal numbers and started slicing stuff up.
It's all arbitrary categorization.
It's a human invention scheme.
But there is no natural order of balance, I don't think.
Everything is literature, which is basically fiction.
I don't think that.
I mean,
But I suppose one thing, by consolidating, you know, you might have a librarian or a curator for a certain collection and, you know, by consolidating, you know, less expertise.
A number of librarians have no relationship
The number of librarians on the staff are vegetary, to see, and make poetic numbers.
So, there's no... There's no magic number.
I've yet to go into a library that had enough librarians, because it's an inexhaustible, I mean, assuming they're trained,
So there is no magic number.
In the 1960s, when I worked at the Denver Public Library, and I guess sometimes I think I get in trouble, or whatever the word is, because I have very high standards.
I can't go for excellence.
I don't want to try.
At the Denver Public Library when I was there in the 1950s, every librarian had a secondary master's degree in their subject.
They actually knew the subject.
But that became a very expensive operation, and they had to drop it a long time ago.
And so, I think it's very difficult for a librarian
to have a broad enough now—I mean, to get the magic fit, if you will.
I tend to feel that the better use is for them to learn the techniques and the mechanics and the access to the sources than to try to master the subject.
But, I mean, subject departments make a lot more sense in a university area of faculties arranged by subject departments.
You have students arranged by them.
But the average person wandering in the front door in public library makes very little sense to them.
Does this library make a statement?
You know, I was at the French library.
It definitely makes a statement.
It's a cultural statement.
It's a national library that expresses the patrimony of France.
In other words, does this library make a statement?
Sure.
I mean, what would that statement be?
I would contend that this library is the most community-connected library of any size in history.
And you believe that time will bear that?
Probably.
I think 10 to 20 years, people will understand that building a lot better than they do.
What are they missing right now?
What are they failing to grasp?
Well, I mean, two hundred people all have two hundred different—it's like the blind man on the elephant kind of thing, because there's so many different pieces.
But I, you know, the building is still very, very busy.
Six, seven thousand feet a day, I guess I'd say.
Yeah.
Right.
How many does New York public do?
Not even close.
The new Sybil only does about thirty-five hours a day.
Well, that's great, and that's very special.
I know.
All I'm saying is my goal was to get people, so we had the connection between people and books and knowledge and information and reading.
I think the building does that, as well as any library around.
And the criticisms that some
Admittedly, some people make that it's, you know, not quiet.
The acoustics, you know— Well, it depends on where you are.
The building's designed because we knew we'd have high traffic.
The center is a high-traffic area.
If you're in the base of the atrium, darn right it's snowy.
But you can go up and out, and go to the Chinese and American center room, go to the fifth floor.
There's quiet spaces.
I asked Regina yesterday, and I'll tell you who she was, I said, do you think that the public library, like San Francisco, can it function as a research level library?
She said no.
I agree.
And you do agree with that.
What sense does it make to try to replicate two of the largest
in the world—Stanford, UC Berkeley.
The public—I mean, maybe we're into definition—the public, well, is doing research at these things.
Certainly at that level.
Right.
If they are interested at that level, they are probably in an academic program, or probably have access to university life.
Of course, matters like San Francisco history, that would be an exception.
Oh, I agree.
That's the best history of culture in San Francisco in the world.
As well as should be.
Working hard to make it matter.
What's your take on these affinity homes and groups?
This is something that's new to me, you know, that eczema, you know, if you're a group and you want to
contribute X amount of dollars, then you can have the Filipino-American affinity room, or the gay-lesbian room, or this or that, you know.
Is this something that you developed in concert with the library board and the— Well, I think— We haven't even gotten into the library board concept, either.
The genesis was Steve Colton.
When we were trying to figure out how to get a new library, back to the poll in 1988, we knew that the people of San Francisco were passionate about their neighborhoods.
And for the main library, they were, generally speaking, embarrassed about its state of affairs.
And while people did use it, 2,500 people a day, roughly, there was no passion around it, except for a handful of people, including Marjorie Stern and Migmar, the three ladies in the book.
Anyway, so we knew if we were going to raise that kind of money, we had to take a rather large, monolithic institution and disaggregate it.
into pieces that people could be passionate about.
So, Steve started working on what he called the compact, the stakeholder compact idea, which turned out to be too intellectual for practically everybody, I think.
But then, as we were in process, and we were faced with, you know,
There's no way we were going to get any money to furnish that building.
You can't buy it out of bond issue by state law.
And to get that ton of money out of the city budget, which had been running a $150 million deficit every year, was draining.
We actually thought raising it in private was pretty close to draining, too.
But to do that, we knew we had to create
elements in the library that people would become passionate about and would support—their time and their money.
Secondly, my view was the old library—and I contend some folks would like it to return to the days—the old library was kind of a club kind of environment.
It was so difficult to find things in there, and it was—you kind of had to be an insider to really use the plan.
I mean, not technically, but—so it was almost kind of a club kind of thing, and it ignored major parts of the population of the city.
The previous city archivist, who she and I did not get along well, did not quite
material on the gay and lesbian community.
Did not collect material on the Chinese-American community.
Did not—I mean, huge sectors of our population were ignored.
But the Chinese-American community you mentioned, they're not an affinity group?
Yeah, they are.
Are they?
They raised a million dollars.
Did they?
So we were looking for a way to generate the support and the interest.
So back to, I mean, my commitment, Steve's and my commitment was to try to do the best as possible, to strive for everything.
It would take money.
So, but it also accomplished part of my goal, which is to become community connected and to involve, same as the community had never been involved in the library before.
I did.
Raised the money, got them involved.
There's a lot of misconception.
All those spaces are essentially celebration spaces and display spaces and quiet reading places most of the time.
They're not designed to be many like that.
I did not— No repositories for research collections.
No.
I did not want to break the collections up.
into little nooks and crannies.
That's what the old library was, because people can't find them.
I also wanted—I mean, it tied in with the architecture of having those corners, the special architectural spaces.
So, it was a combination of factors.
But it was not designed to be a small library or a collection or a research collection.
Not in there.
The closest thing it would be would be the gay lesbian collection, which they provided operational money to support.
And so, going back to the acquisitions, not only did the book collection acquisition dribble, the archives jumped dramatically, too.
So, you know, the books people were donating jumped.
The whole thing just went up geometrically.
Do printed books figure in the future, in your view?
Certainly.
Well, we have mothers, I mean.
The whole thing is, you know... I don't know why people keep trying to get me to say the books are going to go away.
They're not.
Some of them are going to change their function.
Reference books would be history intended.
Yeah, and, you know, maybe the OED, the Oxford English Dictionary, is better on the computer.
I mean, the words are changing every day.
The Encyclopedia Britannica changes every day.
Well, no, I think the OED... I tried the OED online.
I think it sucked.
I've not tried it online, yeah.
And they may have new versions now.
But, I mean, there are certain things that are better as a book, and certain things that are better as a computer.
I mean, one of the challenges you have is if this book didn't come out until 1999.
Yeah, that's right.
That's what will have changed by that time.
Oh, that's why I plan to, you know, write this chapter, like, immediately.
And then revisit it at the, you know, like if I call you again to go off a few things or something.
You can never be, obviously, a book, a printed book cannot be immediate, but you can certainly try and bring it as close to publication as you can.
And this is not meant to be a work of journalism, so it is.
There is a little more perspective.
Are there lessons?
I mean—well, certainly it didn't end happily for you.
I mean, it ended up— What do you think?
It was time for me to move on.
I started thinking of leaving last fall.
Why?
I did what I said I'd do.
And I tend to be a builder, not a runner.
I was—for a variety of reasons.
I took a month off, went to Baja in the motor home, came back.
Anyway, a lot of the fun had gone out of it, so I didn't want to do that anymore.
Politics got into it.
The hassles got into it.
And I was tired.
I spent ten years of my life working on that thing, practically seven days a week.
And as you say, it's done.
And we opened it.
We got it open.
public use, is it?
So you do feel it was time to move on?
Oh, yeah.
I wouldn't have stayed there very long.
I had not planned on staying there for the rest of my career.
Good grief.
How old are you now?
Fifty-seven.
Would you like to build another library after what you've been through here?
Probably not.
It takes a lot of time and energy.
I think
If I did that, I wouldn't be a director.
I'd either be a consultant, which I'm not that interested in, or a king.
Plus king of libraries, I might do it.
Because I would want the authority up front.
To do what?
To do the project.
Without interference?
No, I didn't hire the architect.
I didn't handle the money.
The Department of Public Works managed the contract.
We had—in my career here, I had four mayors.
I had at least forty-five commissioners.
I had three commissions in eighteen months.
One of the members of the Board of Supervisors who feel they are elected to fix potholes, et cetera, and so they're not reluctant to tell the department has what to do.
When they set up the charter in 1932, it was reacting to the graft in the city.
They dispersed the power in the city so much, nobody could run the city.
They changed the charter, and Mayor Brown is in, and he's running the city.
There's no question about it.
No, he's running the city.
No.
But when I came here, no one was running the city, because you had the controller.
who at that time was appointed for life and had to pre-approve every expenditure over four hundred dollars out of a two-billion dollar pension.
And he should have retired ten years before.
We had the CAO, because California counties had county administrators, like county managers, who are both city and county.
What is CAO's staff?
Chief Administrative Officer.
So, the CAO at that time was appointed for ten years and had total control over the Department of Public Works Convention Center.
Big, probably about fifty percent of the cities left here.
Unaccountable to anyone.
Had a department that's been very, very changed for a long, long time.
And if I couldn't get along with him, forget it.
It wouldn't happen.
So, every decision was appealable.
If I made a decision and the staff didn't like it, they could go to the commission, they could go to the board of supervisors, they could go to the mayor, they could go to the union, they could go to the press.
It was quite a tap tap to move this thing through.
I think I've got plenty of stuff.
Okay.
Unless anything I've missed, anything you want to add?
No, I'd say we'll come back before you put it to bed and see if anything's changed.
All right, well, I plan to, actually.
I think you understood the issue of the question of whether major public libraries should be research libraries or not.
One of the difficulties we have in this country is we have no mechanism really in place to have a depository of last resort.
Now, I was in discussions with Peter Lyman at UC Berkeley to let me send stuff over to the Northern California repository, which he—in his daily work.
And we had agreed mentally that that was a good plan, to do a way to go from the city to the state better.
Not simple, and I had a couple other things I was trying to do at the time.
So, I'll give Baker credit for that concept.
there needs to be a home for last copy in the country, and there is none.
And, you know, I didn't even raise the issue, but, you know, so many libraries all over the country, and this is the longest on you on this one, but everyone's doing it, are getting rid of books without checking to see if it's a last copy.
You know, and OCLC can tell you if it's a last copy, too.
Well, not necessarily.
In fact, someday we're going to wake up, OCLC will have the largest bibliographic database in the world, but no one has the books anymore.
Because most of the people who loaded the early records didn't inventory.
They sent their shelf list to Taiwan, and somebody couponsed the card.
Now, over time, that's lessened because as you buy a new one and you get the record from OCLC, they can make that connection.
But don't kid yourself that OCLC is accurate on the last copy.
So actually what you're suggesting is that there are more last copies, that there are probably more books accounted for on that list than there are books.
There are more bibliographic records than there are books by a magnitude of several million.
Really?
So, you know, one of our strengths, public libraries in this world, is we're local institutions.
One of our liabilities is we're local institutions.
I think, you know, the state of California should have a last copy depository and should have a system in place to encourage libraries to send the material that no longer fits their collection profile.
But we don't have that.
Okay.
Have fun.
Good.
Thomas, is there anything else that you want?
No, I don't think so.